# Fuel-Optimal Fleet Assignment in the Brazilian Domestic Air Transportation System

In this repository, we provide an overview of the processed datasets and optimization code behind the fuel-optimal fleet assignment (FOFA) model, and detail its implementation on the domestic Brazilian air transportation system as a case study.

## Fuel-Optimal Fleet Assignment (FOFA) Model

### Table of Contents

1. [ Processed Datasets ](#importing)
2. [ Optimization Code ](#building)
3. [ Results ](#results)

---
<a name="importing"></a>
### 1: Processed Datasets

**Description:** The optimization model takes 15 datasets as inputs. Detailed below, these were generated by processing [monthly data](https://www.gov.br/anac/pt-br/assuntos/regulados/empresas-aereas/Instrucoes-para-a-elaboracao-e-apresentacao-das-demonstracoes-contabeis/envio-de-informacoes) from the Brazilian National Civil Aviation Agency (ANAC), corresponding to all of 2024. Additional information about the ANAC datasets can be found [here](https://www.gov.br/anac/pt-br/assuntos/dados-e-estatisticas/mercado-do-transporte-aereo/demanda-e-oferta).

* **Aircraft Operational and Performance Statistics**:
  - ```Aircraft Statistics.xlsx```: This table contains ten operational performance characteristics for 19 different aircraft types that operated domestically in Brazil during 2024.
    
  - Operational performance characteristics include: (1) fleet-wide count; (2) fleet-wide yearly flying times (in days); (3) fleet-wide productivity (in ASKs/day); (4) fuel burn (in L/hr); (5) fuel burn (in L/km); (6) fuel burn (in L/RPK); (7) average number of seats; (8) average stage length (in km); (9) range (in km); and (10) take-off runway length (in m).
    
  - Aircraft types include: A320NEO; A321NEO; A319CEO; A320CEO; A321CEO; A330-200; A330-900; ATR42-500; ATR72-500; ATR72-600; B737-8; B737-800; B737-500; B737-700; B737-800; B787-9; C208; E195; and E195-E2.
  
* **Airport Characteristics**:
  - ```Airport Codes.xlsm```: This table contains the ICAO and IATA code, as well as latitude, longitude, and primary runway length (in m) of 169 airports in Brazil (indexed 1 through 169). For example, for Rio de Janeiro Galeao, Index: 34, ICAO Code: SBGL; IATA Code: GIG; Latitute: -22.81; Longitude: -43.25; and Primary Runway Length: 4000m.

* **Route Characteristics**:
  - ```daily_route_departures.csv```: This 1417-by-366 matrix contains the number of departures on 1417 origin-destination route segments (indexed 1 through 1417) in the Brazilian air transportation system, for each of the 366 days of 2024, aggregated for all eight domestic Brazilian airlines. These 1417 route segments had at least one departure during 2024.
    
  - ```airline_specific_yearly_route_departures.csv```: This 1417-by-8 matrix contains the total (yearly) number of departures on the identified 1417 route segments, for each of the eight domestic Brazilian airlines.
  
  - ```route_distances.csv```: This 1417-by-1 matrix contains the average distance (in km) for the identified 1417 route segments.
    
  - ```route_flight_times.csv```: This 1417-by-1 matrix contains the average flight time (in days) for each of the identified 1417 route segments. For example, for route #1, the average flight time is 0.028 days, or ~40 minutes.
 
  - ```route_airport_index.csv```: This 1417-by-2 matrix contains the mapping between each of the idenfied 1417 route segments, and their respective origin and destination airports (indexed 1 through 169). For example, route #1 operated between airport #1 (ARX) and airport #33 (FOR).

* **Route Passengers**:
  - ```daily_route_passengers.csv```: This 1417-by-366 matrix contains the total number of passengers that were transported along each of the identified 1417 route segments on each day of the year, aggregated for all eight domestic Brazilian airlines.
  -  ```airline_specific_yearly_route_passengers.csv```: This 1417-by-8 matrix contains the total (yearly) number of passengers that were transported on the identified 1417 route segments, for each of the eight domestic Brazilian airlines.
 
* **Fuel Consumption**:
  - ```daily_fuel_consumed.csv```: This 1417-by-366 matrix contains the total fuel consumed (in L) each of the identified 1417 routes, aggregated for all eight domestic Brazilian airlines.
  - ```airline_specific_yearly_fuel_consumed.csv```: This 1417-by-8 matrix contains the total (yearly) fuel consumed (in L) on each of the identified 1417 route segments, for each of the eight domestic Brazilian airlines.

* **Aircraft Utilization**:
  - ```daily_aircraft_flying_times.csv```: This 19-by-366 matrix contains the total fleet-wide flying times (in days) for each of the 19 different aircraft types and each day of 2024 (indexed 1 through 366), aggregated for all eight domestic Brazilian airlines. For example, for January 1st and the A320NEO, (1,1), the fleet flew a cumulative amount of 21.84 days, or 524 hours (i.e., 524/65 = ~8 hours/day).
  - ```airline_specific_yearly_aircraft_flying_times.csv```: This 19-by-8 matrix contains the total (yearly) fleet-wide flying times (in days) for each of the 19 different aircraft types and each of the eight domestic Brazilian airlines.

* **Traffic Metrics**:
  - ```metrics.csv```: This 2-by-266 matrix contains the available seat-kms (ASKs) and total revenue passenger-kms (RPKs) produced on a daily basis in the Brazilian Air Transportation System, aggregated for all eight domestic Brazilian airlines.
  
  - ```airline_specific_yearly_metrics.csv```: This 2-by-8 matrix contains the total (yearly) available seat-kms (ASKs) and total revenue passenger-kms (RPKs) produced by each of the eight domestic Brazilian airlines.

([ back to top ](#back_to_top))

---
<a name="building"></a>
### 2: Optimization Code

**Description:** The FOFA framework is implemented on the python scrypt ```FOFA_v2.py```. 
* The model can be run separately for the three largest airlines in Brazil by available seat-kms (ASKs) - Azul Linhas Aereas Brasileiras, Gol Linhas Aereas, LATAM Brasil - or on aggregate considering al eight Brazilian domestic airlines, in the form of a Combined Brazilian National Airline.
* To avoid making assumptions about what a representative day of operations looks like (e.g., in terms of the average daily number of passengers transported on each route, or average daily fleet utilization), the model is run on a yearly basis, aggregating values for the entirety of 2024. This modeling decision not only has the advantage of incorporating seasonality effects, but also enables building a feasible integer solution region.

**User Action:** To run the code, simply download ```FOFA_v2.py```, alongside the [Processed Datasets](https://github.com/andyeske/FOAA/tree/main/Processed%20Datasets) folders. The python scrypt requires the use of a [Gurobi](https://www.gurobi.com/academia/academic-program-and-licenses/?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=M3+A+Search+US+Brand&gad_source=1&gad_campaignid=22845995653&gbraid=0AAAAADimQ3jj4Ag29wWuPvh0gcP5gZAed&gclid=Cj0KCQjwgpzIBhCOARIsABZm7vGEZgRpIldNBFiA50gIS_sXEFHWZnGlusO4OP9ZU0IxiBviV5hoi9gaAhnOEALw_wcB) license, which can be obtained for free for students.

```FOFA_v2.py``` requires minimal user set-up - once open in a python environment, only the 'Step 0' section requires user-editing. Here, the user can appropriately change the dataset directories, select the airline, and modifiy the sensitivity vector for the load factors:

  ```
# ------------------------------------------------ #
# Step 0: User-editable Parameters
# ------------------------------------------------ #

# --> Data Directory 
directory = '/Users/andyeske/Desktop/Fall 2025/Optimization Methods/Project/Processed Datasets/'

# --> System-wide Load Factor Sensitivity Vector
LF_vec = [0.85,0.86,0.87,0.88,0.89,0.9]

# --> Desired Airline
# Options: 
# (1): AD - Azul Linhas Aereas Brasileiras 
#      8 aircraft types, 30.2% market share by ASKs
#      Minimum LF = 82.2%

# (2): G3 - GOL Linhas Aereas
#      3 aircraft types, 30.5% market share by ASKs
#      Minimum LF = 84.7%

# (3): JJ - LATAM Brasil 
#      6 aircraft types, 38.7% market share by ASKs
#      Minimum LF = 83.6%

# (4): Combined Brazilian National Airline (19 aircraft types)
#      19 aircraft types, including aicraft from:
#      -> 0S - Sideral Linhas Aereas
#      -> 2F - Azul Conecta
#      -> 2Z - Voepass
#      -> 7M - MAP Linhas Aereas
#      -> E4 - Abaete Aviacao
#      Minimum LF = 83.4%

Option = 4
  ```

Depending on the problem complexity, it could be useful to edit some of the Gurobi solver parameters detailed in 'Step 2'.

([ back to top ](#back_to_top))

---
<a name="results"></a>
### 3: Results
A set of representative results obtained from implementing the FOFA model on Azul Linhas Aereas Brasileiras (AD), Gol Linhas Aereas (G3), LATAM Brasil (JJ), and the Combined Brazilian National Airline (RG) using a range of load factors (LF) can be found in ```Results.xlsx``` under the [Processed Datasets](https://github.com/andyeske/FOFA/tree/main/Processed%20Datasets) folder. For each airline considered, this excel document includes:
* **Expected system-wide fuel consumption reductions (in %) with respect to the baseline, for each LF**:
  * Baseline 2024 System-wide Fuel Consumptions (in L): 0.99 billion (AD); 0.94 billion (G3); 1.36 billion (JJ); and 3.32 billion (RG).
  * Overall, while AD, G3, and JJ see system-wide fuel consumption reductions ranging between 1% - 4% across all LFs (with the reduction increasing with the LF), RG consistently sees a reduction that is higher than any other airline.
  * This is due to the fact that, RG, possesing the most diverse fleet of aircraft (due to combining all airlines into one), is able to best match capacity to demand in the network.
  
* **Optimized average stage lengths (in km) for each aircraft in the airline's fleet**:
  * Overall, the main trend observed is that the average stage lengths (ASLs) of the fuel-efficient aircraft, such as the A320NEO, increased, i.e., these aircraft were deployed on longer routes, where the overall fuel burn is greater.
  * Meanwhile, the ASL of less fuel-efficient aircraft, such as the A320CEO, decreased.
  * The system-wide ASL remained practically the same, meaning that the network itself did not change (i.e., the number of frequencies and the total distance flown did not change), acting as a sanity check to the model formulation.
  * The reported ASLs correspond to the optimization case that takes as input the same LFs that each airline observed in reality.

([ back to top ](#back_to_top))

## Authors

Andy Eskenazi, Emilia Ospina Arango, Mina Cezairli <br />
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics <br />
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2025 <br />
